Borderlands 3
==============

:date: 2021-10-31
:category: Reviews
:slug: borderlands-3
:summary: 6/10 - The story keeps getting in the way

Borderlands 3 is pretty fun when it comes to shooting chaotic effects everywhere
at everything. The general gun-play seems a bit more fun than previous
iterations in the series although the character selection doesn't seem as
inspired.

The main antagonists are just annoying, trying to resemble a hollow form of
Handsome Jack's constant communication with you from Borderlands 2. The story
isn't interesting and after each obvious "revelation" I only came to realize how
dumb everything you are working with in this universe truly is.

The quests in the game are unmemorable, and require you to sit around listening
to dialogue for several minutes before the quest givers offer you an item you
need to proceed with the quest. This is maybe fine for an initial playthrough
but really slows the game down on a 2nd playthrough either on the "True Vault
Hunter Mode" or with another one of the classes. The comedy in the game has
devolved into "ITS FUNNY BECAUSE WE ARE YELLING", and relies too much on
callbacks to characters from previous games in the series.

Items unlock quite slowly as you progress, I was finding "artifact" items for
quite a while before the artifact slot unlocked for me to equip them.

The legendary classification of items seem to be thrown around a lot more
commonly than in previous games, so much so that I rarely used a gun that was
not legendary.

The menus in the game make little sense, at least when trying to play with a
keyboard and mouse. I had to lookup how I was meant to apply a skin to a weapon,
which involved pressing "F" and then "X" or something. Trying to keep track of
more than 1 quest is difficult, to find a quest in your current area you may
need to cycle through all of your active quests until you find one that doesn't
have the waypoint looking at an area transition.

The pricing for this game is very unreasonable, the base game is fine buy the
DLC packs can end up costing more than the base game and based on reviews only
add a few hours of gameplay each. Maybe if they get priced under $10 for the
season pass 1 & 2 I'll pick them up but there is no way I'm touching them at
their current price point.

6/10 - Its pretty fun if you can find a friend or 3 to play with but don't
expect anything deep or memorable.
