Halo Infinite - Campaign
=========================

:date: 2022-01-03
:category: Game Reviews
:slug: halo-infinite-campaign
:summary: 3/10 - A Disappointing, repetitive world without any sort of good
          story to help prop it up

After playing the multiplayer side of Halo Infinite I was a fairly excited to
play through the campaign. The game ran pretty well on my computer and the guns
seemed pretty fun to use. I was a bit hesitant about the open world aspects of
the game though. This review is going to focus exclusively on the campaign of
Halo Infinite, since that is the part that 343 Industries decided was worth $80
on its own.

Getting started
----------------

The game starts off pretty traditional with a mission on a space ship, followed
by a short adventure through some forerunner base. This is where you meet my
first major complaint about the game: the Cortana replacement. Named "The
Weapon", she makes annoying commentary about everything you do; tries to make
jokes that never land and has the strangest facial expressions that never fit
the mood.


Open world
-----------

After this second level, the open world section of the game appears which is my
second major complaint. Halo games have always consisted of fairly large levels
which you can approach in a variety of ways, and instead of embracing these
individual sandbox experiences from the previous games, we get a single
environment which feels more like Far Cry than Halo. This open world experience
suffers from the same thing that nearly every other open world game does;
sparsely populated with simple encounters that you largely have no reason to
interact with. The game nearly exactly follows the Far Cry formula, of capturing
a base (FOB in this case) which marks a bunch of objectives like "kill this
enemy that has a huge HP pool" or "rescue this group of 4 marines". The open
world also seems to have brought with it a more broken checkpoint system. The
game crashed on me once as I was driving a tank around, and after reloading the
game I was in the same position but my tank and marine companions were missing.

Along with the open world parts of the game come incremental gear upgrades, such
as improves shields or reduction in grappling hook cool down times. It is meant
to act as a carrot to get you to explore the world but the world is so barren
and boring that I ended up just ignoring it unless I happened to drive right
past something blinking green. Once I unlocked all the grappling hook and shield
capacity upgrades I never bothered with anything in the open world any more.


Campaign missions
------------------

The third major complaint I have is the actual campaign missions, they are the
least impressive of all of the Halo games I have played (all but Halo 5). They
almost exclusively take place inside of Forerunner buildings so they all end up
feeling and looking the same. Nearly every level also has the same gimmick, you
find a door or elevator or something that doesn't have power, find one or more
"power seeds" and bring them back to the thing that needs power to continue on.
It also seems that there isn't a way to replay campaign levels, so trying to
beat levels in the shortest time, or with the largest score (which was my
favourite thing to do in Halo: MCC) is out of the question. The open world plays
a bit into my complaints with the campaign missions, since instead of just
playing the next mission you first have to walk or drive over to it; and maybe
find whatever weapons you want to start it with along the way. It almost makes
the open world feel like a series of short commute levels that are not engaging
or fun.


Story telling
----------------

The way the story is actually told is my fourth major complaint. It is all just
exposition by the major villain, and "The Weapon". The exposition is almost
shakespearean at times as the lights dim and the characters monologue directly
at Master Chief for several minutes at a time about all of their intentions.


Closing thoughts
----------------

On the bright side, the grappling hook is pretty fun to use and throwing
explosive containers around never got boring, although it was weird from a world
setting how the banished always keep groups of these volatile canisters around
them at all times.

It took me 3 weeks to beat the campaign, as I just couldn't commit myself to
continue playing the game and eventually just decided to force myself to sit
down and finish it. Several times I just had to turn it off after listening
through a cutscene, and then I would just play something else instead of
continuing to try and slog through the campaign.

The game is also completely missing co-op, which has been one of the best parts
of Halo since the beginning

Score
------

3/10 - Pick up Halo: The Master Chief Collection instead if you want to play
through some Halo campaign levels.
